## Results {.page_break_before}

Both the brain and microbiome of humans
develop rapidly in the first years of life,
enabling extensive signaling between the gut
and central nervous system (dubbed the “gut-brain axis”
1,2).
While emerging evidence implicates gut microorganisms
and microbiota composition
and cognitive outcomes in neurodevelopmental disorders (e.g., autism),
the role of the gut microbial metabolism on typical neurodevelopment
has not been explored in detail.
To examine the relationships
between early childhood gut microbiome and neurocognitive development,
we collected stool samples from
251 expectant mothers and
313 children
enrolled in the RESONANCE study of child development -
part of the NIH Environmental Influences on Child Health Outcomes (ECHO) Initiative
(Table 1).
RESONANCE is a longitudinal observational study
of healthy and neurotypical brain development
that spans the fetal and infant to adolescent life stages,
combining neuroimaging (magnetic resonance imaging, MRI),
neurocognitive assessments,
bio-specimen analyses,
and rich demographic, socioeconomic, family and medical history information
(Supplementary Figure 1).

## Table 1 - Baseline characteristics of ECHO RESONANCE participants

| metadatum                              | value        |
|---------------------------------------:|:------------:|
|                        All samples (n) |     802      |
|                     Total subjects (n) |     561      |
|                     Pregnant women (n) |     251      |
|                               Kids (n) |     310      |
|                     Kids under 1yo (n) |      81      |
|                      Kids over 2yo (n) |     200      |
|     Kids with high resolution scan (n) |     141      |
| Kids with cognitive function score (n) |     263      |
|                     Kids with both (n) |     133      |
|                     Non-white kids (%) |    40.19     |
|                    Mixed race kids (%) |    23.49     |
|                Age in years (mean, SD) |  4.27, 3.58  |
|                         BMI (mean, SD) | 16.66, 2.68  |
|                Maternal SES (mean, SD) | 51.68, 10.86 |

As an initial characterization step,
we used shotgun metagenomic sequencing
to generate taxonomic and functional profiles
for each of our maternal and child fecal samples.
Participant age was the greatest driver
of both taxonomic and functional diversity,
as expected (Figure 1a, b).
Children under one year of age
formed a distinct cluster from older children,
characterized by high aerobe load and low alpha (within-sample) diversity
(Figure 1b, Supplementary Figure 1),
and samples from children over two years old
were similar to maternal samples
(Figure 1a, c, Supplementary Figure 1a).

## Figure 1: The gut microbiome of children is associated with neurocognition.

a, Principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) for all subjects
   based on species-level Bray-Curtis dissimilarity;
   most variation is driven by age and the presence of Prevotella(3,4).
b, PCoA for all subjects
   based on Bray-Curtis dissimilarity in functional profiles
   (UniRef90 accessory genes)
   after removing gene families that were present in >90% of subjects
   in a given age group;
   variation driven by similar effects as for taxonomic profiles.
c, First principle coordinate axis of species PCoA for child samples vs age;
   younger children cluster away from older children,
   and are lower in diversity.
d, First principle coordinate axis of accessory gene family PCoA
   for child samples vs age;
   functional diversity increases with age.
e, PERMANOVA analysis for selected subject metadata
   and Bray-Curtis dissimilarity for species-level taxonomic profiles
   or functional profiles
   using Kegg-Orthology
(KO),
Pfams or accessory UniRef90s;
   subject and subject type include all subjects,
   2+ includes only children over 2 years old,
   others include all children for which the measure was available;
   stars indicate significance after Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction
   (* <0.1, ** < 0.01, *** < 0.001).
f, Child age vs normalized cognitive function score;
   age-appropriate assessments
   achieve similar score distributions for their age groups.
g, FSEA analysis for gene sets with neuroactive potential
   (see Methods).

As in previous adult and infant cohorts,
functional beta diversity was generally lower than taxonomic diversity
(Supplementary Figure 1),
suggesting that healthy guts select for similar gene functions
even when different species contribute those functions.
However,
this interpretation may be complicated
by the fact that as many as 50% of sequencing reads in some samples
are not mapped to any of the reference genes used,
and are thus unclassified (Figure 1b).
Interestingly,
though children under 1 tended to have substantially fewer species
and, therefore,
fewer total genes
(Figure 1d, right),
those genes tended to be better characterized
(Figure 1b, d)5.
Consistent with previous studies
of adult cohorts from industrialized countries4,
another major driver of variation visible from principal coordinates analysis
was the presence of Prevotella copri
(Supplementary Figure 3).
Like samples from very young children,
samples with P.
copri had reduced diversity
compared with samples from older children and pregnant mothers without P.
copri
(Figure 1a, Supplementary Figure 3).
Overall,
these results are consistent with prior studies
of adult and childhood gut microbiomes.

To assess the potential role of the microbiome
in these neurocognitive processes,
child stool samples were collected
alongside MRI and age-appropriate neurocognitive evaluations
(Figure 1f).
Throughout childhood,
a child’s brain undergoes remarkable
anatomical, microstructural, organization, and functional
change.
By age 5,
a child’s brain has reached >85% of its adult size,
has achieved near-adult levels of myelination,
and the pattern of axonal connections has been established
6.
Measures of overall cognitive ability
(e.g., intelligence quotient, IQ)
7,8,
MRI measures of cortical volume and morphometry,
as well as other potentially relevant clinical metadata,
were compared to taxonomic and functional profile dissimilarity
by PERMANOVA
9,10.
Consistent with previous studies,
inter-individual variation accounted for the majority of variation
in microbial taxonomic and functional profiles
([79%, 77%], q < 0.001)
(Figure 1e, Supplementary Table 1).
Subject type (child or mother)
accounted for a large amount of variation
(4-6% q < 0.001),
but this effect dropped to 2%
when children under 2 years of age were excluded,
suggesting that age, rather than subject type,
is actually responsible for driving the taxonomic and functional variation.
Among children’s samples,
age accounted for over 20% of variation
in both taxonomic and functional profiles,
but this effect also largely disappeared
when children under 2 were excluded
(Figure 1e, Supplementary Table 1),
suggesting that the age effect
is primarily driven by the enormous changes in the microbiome
over the first year.
Microbiome taxonomic and functional variation
was also associated with moderate but significant differences
in several neurocognitive measures, including
age-appropriate measures of cognitive ability
([2.04%, 2.08%], q < 0.01, N=263).
We also found significant associations
between regional brain volumes
and microbial taxonomic and functional variation,
including the sizes of the cerebellum
([3.63%, 2.82%], q < 0.01),
the subcortex
([3.64% 5.42%], q < [0.01, 0.001]),
neocortex
([1.95% 1.1%], q < [0.01, NS]),
and limbic regions
([4.31% 5.9%], q < [0.01, 0.001])
(N = 141 for all high resolution scans)
even after controlling for the effect of age on brain volume.
These results suggest
that there is a strong relationship
between the gut microbiome and neurocognitive development
(Figure 1e).
Though the direction of causality cannot be determined,
experimental models of brain development neurological disorders
have demonstrated that microbes in the intestine
may have causal effects on the functioning of the central nervous system
11–14.

To investigate potential mechanisms
through which the gut microbiome might affect
neurostructural and neurocognitive development
in infants and young children,
we focused on a group of microbial genes with neuroactive potential
identified by Valles-Colomer et al.
15
which code for enzymes that metabolize neuroactive compounds.
We analyzed the association of each of these gene sets
with our neurocognitive measures
using feature set enrichment analysis (FSEA)
16,17
(Figure 1g, Supplementary Table 2).
Briefly, we calculated the Pearson correlation
between the relative abundance of all identified UniRef90 gene families
with each neurocognitive measure,
then calculated the Mann-Whitney U statistic
for each potentially neuroactive subset.
Using this analysis,
we observed that catabolic and anabolic pathways
for several molecules known to be important in the developing brain
were significantly associated
with overall cognitive function scores
and the size of brain subregions.
In particular,
microbial genes for GABA synthesis
were positively associated with
neocortical (q < 0.01, Figure 1g, Supplementary Table 2),
subcortical (q < 0.01),
and limbic (q < 0.001) volume,
and negatively associated with
cerebellar volume (q < 0.01)
and overall cognitive function (q < 1e-5).
Interestingly,
GABA degradation genes
were also positively associated with
the size of the subcortex
and negatively associated with
cognitive function (q < 0.05).
This may be due to higher GABA synthesis
selecting for the ability to catabolize this molecule,
making it difficult to assess how actual GABA concentrations in the gut
are associated with brain development.
Unlike the metabolism of GABA,
glutamate synthesis and degradation genes
have an inverse relationship
(Figure 1g, Supplementary Table 2).
The glutamate degradation gene set
was negatively associated with
cognitive function (q < 1e-4)
and cerebellar volume (q < 0.05)
and positively associated with
the size of the neocortex (q < 0.05),
while glutamate synthesis
was marginally negatively associated with
overall cognitive function
and the size of the neocortex,
while positively associated with
the size of the cerebellum (q < 0.05).
However,
it remains difficult to predict
how gut concentrations of glutamate
might be related to microbial metabolism;
while it might be intuitive to expect
that higher glutamate synthesis and lower glutamate degradation
would lead to higher gut concentrations of glutamate,
it might also be the case that lower glutamate concentrations
select for microbes that can synthesize it
and against those that break it down.
Glutamate is also far more prevalent in the diet
and can be rapidly metabolized by gut epithelial cells,
making the relationship between gut concentrations
and microbial metabolism even more complex
18.
Understanding the relationship of intestinal GABA and glutamate metabolism
may be particularly important to understanding the role of the gut microbiome
in early childhood cognitive development.
Together,
GABA and glutamate make up the main cerebellar output neurons
19,20
with inhibitory GABAergic cells
being widely distributed in the cerebellum projecting out of the cerebellar cortex
and excitatory glutamatergic neurons receiving afferent input.
The cerebellum,
coined ‘the little brain’,
is one of the earliest brain regions to develop
6,21,
but continues to grow into adulthood
22,
making it especially vulnerable for disorder and disease
23.
Specifically,
neurodevelopmental disorders, such as autism spectrum disorder,
have been associated with an imbalance of the inhibitory/ excitatory system
regulated by glutamate and GABA,
with recent evidence suggesting
an impaired conversion of glutamate to GABA in the disorder
24.

This is the first look at an ongoing study
of child neurocognitive and microbiome development.
Using cross-sectional data,
we have shown that differences
in gut microbial taxa and genes
are associated with the structural development of the brain
and with cognitive development.
In addition,
we have shown that particular microbial gene sets with neuroactive potential
are associated with neurocognitive development,
thus perhaps playing a direct role
in the gut luminal exposure of children to neuroactive metabolites.
This study is ongoing,
and we are collecting additional clinical data
such as participant genetic profiles,
lead exposure,
air quality data,
and more
to understand how
the environment, microbiome, and biological development
interact to shape neurocognition.
Future studies
assessing gut metabolite pools
combined with MR spectroscopic methods
to quantify concentrations of neurotransmitters such as GABA and glutamate
in the brain,
as well humanized mouse models and longitudinal human data,
will provide further insight
into the interactions of microbial metabolism
and neurocognitive development.
As we continue to follow these subjects,
we will be able to identify how early life microbial exposures,
including exposures of mothers in utero,
might affect future neurocognitive outcomes.
