# Materials and methods {.page_break_before}

## Cohort description
Data used in this study
were drawn from the ongoing longitudinal RESONANCE study
of healthy and neurotypical brain and cognitive development,
based at Brown University in Providence, RI, USA.
From the RESONANCE cohort,
310 typically-developing children and
251 healthy pregnant women were selected for analysis in this study.
General participant demographics are provided in Table 1,
with children being representative of the RI population.
As a broad background,
children in the BAMBAM cohort were born full-term
(>37 weeks gestation)
with height and weight average for gestational age,
and from uncomplicated singleton pregnancies.
Children with known major risk factors for developmental abnormalities at enrolment
were excluded.
In addition to screening at the time of enrollment,
on-going screening for worrisome behaviors
using validated tools were performed
to identify at-risk children and remove them from subsequent analysis.

## Additional data collection
Demographic and other non-biospecimen data such as
race and ethnicity,
parental education and occupation,
feeding behavior (breast- and formula-feeding),
and child weight and height,
were collected through questionnaires or direct examination as appropriate.
All data were collected at every assessment visit,
which was scheduled on the same day of the MRI scan
or within 2 weeks of the scan date.

## Approval for human patient research
All procedures for this study were approved
by the local institutional review board at Rhode Island Hospital,
and all experiments adhered to the regulation of the review board.
Written informed consent was obtained
from all parents or legal guardians of enrolled participants.

## Stool sample collection and handling
Stool samples
(n=802)
were collected by parents
in OMR-200 tubes (OMNIgene GUT, DNA Genotek, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada),
stored on ice, and brought within 24 hrs to the lab in RI
where they were immediately frozen at -80˚C.
Stool samples were not collected
if the infant had taken antibiotics within the last two weeks.

## DNA extraction and sequencing of metagenomes
All processing of the samples was done at Wellesley College (Wellesley, MA).
Nucleic acids were extracted from stool samples using the
RNeasy PowerMicrobiome kit
automated on the QIAcube (Qiagen, Germantown, MD),
excluding the DNA degradation steps.
Extracted DNA was sequenced at the Integrated Microbiome Resource (IMR, Dalhousie University, NS, Canada).
Shotgun metagenomic sequencing was performed on all samples.
A pooled library (max 96 samples per run)
was prepared using the Illumina Nextera Flex Kit for MiSeq and NextSeq
from 1 ng of each sample.
Samples were then pooled onto a plate and sequenced on
the Illumina NextSeq 550 platform
using 150+150 bp paired-end “high output” chemistry,
generating ~400 million raw reads and ~120 Gb of sequence.

## Computational methods, statistical analyses and data availability
Raw and processed data (excluding PHI)
is available through SRA and Zenodo.org
25.
All code used for statistical and other analysis
was version controlled and is available on github
26.
Software packages included
`vegan` (R package) for PERMANOVAs,
`MultivariateStats.jl` for MDS analysis,
`HypothesisTests.jl` for Mann-Whitney U tests (used in FSEA analysis),
`MultipleTesting.jl` for false discovery rate correction,
and `Makie.jl` for plotting.
Metagenomic data were analyzed using the bioBakery
27
family of tools with default parameters.
Briefly,
`KneadData` (v0.7.1) was used to trim and filter raw sequence reads
and to separate human reads from bacterial sequences.
Samples that passed quality control
were taxonomically profiled to the species level using
`MetaPhlAn2` (v2.7.7)
and functionally profiled by
`HUMAnN2` (v0.11.1).

## MRI Acquisition and data processing
Structural T1-weighted MRI scans
were acquired on a 3T Siemens Trio scanner with a 12-channel head RF array,
preprocessed using a multistep registration procedure.
Cortical reconstruction and volumetric segmentation
was performed with the Freesurfer image analysis suite,
which is documented and freely available for download online (http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/).
Brain regions were divided into
neocortex, cerebellum, limbic and subcortical
regions (for more details on acquisition and processing, see extended methods).

## Neurocognitive assessments
Overall cognitive function was defined by the Early Learning Composite
as assessed via the Mullen Scales of Early Learning (MSEL)
7,
a standardized and population normed tool
for assessing fine and gross motor,
expressive and receptive language,
and visual reception functioning
in children from birth through 68 months of age.
The third edition of the Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development
(Bayley’s III) is a standard series of measures
primarily to assess the development of infants and toddlers,
ranging from 1 to 42 months of age
28.
The Wechsler Intelligence Quotient for Children (WISC)
29
is an individually administered standard intelligence test
for children aged 6 to 16 years.
It derives a full scale intelligence quotient (IQ) score,
which we used to assess overall cognitive functioning.
The fourth edition of the Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence (WPPSI-IV)
29
is an individually administered standard intelligence test
for children aged 2 years 6 months to 7 years 7 months,
trying to meet the increasing need for the assessment of preschoolers.
Just as the WISC,
it derives a full scale IQ score,
which we used to assess overall cognitive functioning.
